This video is brought to you by Squarespace from websites and online stores,
marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespace is the all in one platform to build a beautiful online presence and
run your business.
Check out Squarespace through the link of the description below,
got more on them in just a bit.
In February, 1987,
Israel kicked off the greatest war crimes trial in a generation at the century
of it all said, John Dani,
a former citizen of the USSR who'd rated to America after world war II by his
own account.
He was a simple peaceful man,
a retired auto worker and a grandfather living quietly in the Cleveland suburbs,
but Israeli American disagreed. According to them,
Damian's unassuming exterior hid a legendary monster,
a former Tring camp guard. So sadistic survivors still had nightmares about him.
Zagar was known as not even the terrible and the quest to find out if Damian was
really him would spark one of the biggest post Newburg Nazi trials in history.
Born in rural Ukraine in,
in 1920 de could maintain until the end of his life that he was a regular
village boy caught up in the horror and extermination war.
Others though would accuse him of some of the most awful crimes ever recorded.
Was this former peasant boy, a man or a monster today.
We're going to take a look at one of Europe's darkest era and ask if it's ever
possible to know what's inside a man's soul.
Amid the ever shifting narrative sands of John Damian's life.
There are some hard facts, both as supporters and accusers could agree on.
He'd been born Ivan Duan on the 3rd of April,
1920 and a miserable village in the Ukrainian countryside, a Hamlet physically,
just a hundred kilometers from Kiev, but in reality, it was a lifetime away.
His parents had both been disabled requiring young. I to look after them,
a struggle made harder by Amon having four years of primary education.
The last thing everyone agreed on was that he'd lived through some horrific
times when Ivan was just eight.
The Soviet union had instituted collectivization pro process of bringing
villages onto communal farms under state control. So when famine had broken out,
people were reliance on the party to feed them. And in Ukraine,
the party hadn't just abdicated its responsibilities that used people's hunger
as a weapon.
The ho andmore was the deliberate genocidal starvation of Ukraine's presence
lasting from 90 32 to 90 33 at devastated the countryside killing three
to 4 million people among the places affected was Deon's village,
where people were reduced to eating weeds in an effort to survive. Yet.
The holiday war was just the first disaster to hit this God forsaken region.
When demean York was 17.
Stalin's great purge blew through the village like the dark hurricane amid the
paranoia and annunciations 22 people were executed by now.
The boy was learning that the best way to survive was to keep his head down,
to just do his work as a tractor driver and a mechanic on their collective farm.
And try not to get noticed besides life wasn't all bad.
They were the pretty girls like Maria zebra,
Benu who he sometimes gave lifts to ferrying them to the fields,
but then the third great disaster struck.
And even these small pleasures evaporated in 1939,
the USS R and Nazi Germany jointly invaded Poland by 1940 AAN had been called up
to serve. Although his first would be a tragic comic fast.
One of the red Army's rules was that conscripts needed to bring two changes of
underwear.
Ivan's family were so poor that he couldn't get a second pair.
So he was sent back to his village.
Not that Moscow would care about these rules for much longer.
Some 1941 saw Hitler pull a classic Dick move by invading as a
while. Soviet allies,
since they were closest to the German war machine Ukraine and Beru Bo the brunt
of the attack. When the Nazis arrived in Deen's village, they killed 120 people,
nearly all the men in this rural outpost among the dead were two of Deen's male
relatives, but not Ivan.
By the time the Germans arrived in yoke was already fighting for the motherland.
The battle of key of that September was a doomed him to save Ukraine's capital
from being surrounded as part of the red army deman fought to defend the city,
taking a bullet in the back on the shore of the denier. Unbelievably,
this made in one of the lucky ones,
nearly everyone who fought at Kiev was captured whisked away.
A hospital though deman was temporarily spared temporarily because in early
1942, this peasant boy found himself lighting again in crime here this time,
there would be no escaping.
The Nazi onslaught de army career came to an end one hot rainy day in the
coastal city of ke that's. The area was overrun.
He was captured alongside 200,000 other red army soldiers.
A moment that marks the point in his story where the narrative stop agreeing for
the rest of the war, two account would exist. One of I, the prisoner,
and one of I,
the Y the mass murderer figuring out which was real would haunt prosecutors
and survivors alike for decades
Ins telling he's been the rest of the war in hell.
Bar Nazis treated British American POWs with a modicum of respect.
Those captured from the red army had life expectancies on par with elderly may
flies. After the 5.7 million Soviet army members taken prisoner by Germany,
3.3 million would per from disease,
starvation execution, or being worked to death.
That's 57% of all Soviet POWs after Jews red army soldiers
were the second largest victim group of the Holocaust in suction Inferno.
It's amazing Damian survived fact that he never forgot as he told
it. He was internal first in a brutal pow camp near Hellman Polands before being
bounced to other camps where he was used to slave labor by some miracle,
he kept on the living until 1945. When an American force finally liberated him,
at least that's one version of what happens.
The story let's say of John de village boy and prisoner of
war who later re immigrated the country that had saved him.
But you already know there was another story.
One written in the blood of thousands.
That story we might call the tale of Ivan.
The dark half de man maybe kept hidden for years,
told decades later in court filings and prosecutors' notes.
This is Ivan's story. Not long after being captured in crimee in 1942, Ivan,
the man of a way to escape the PO camps with a whole load of new territory to
oversee the Nazis were recruiting what they called. Auxiliary police guards.
Volunteers who'd become better known as Tranic men after the camp
where they were trained of the 5,000 plus Tranic men trained,
virtually all were Soviet POWs.
They were also mostly sadists anti-Semites or psychopaths out to save their own
skins, volunteering to become a Tranic men.
Didn't just mean taking on some like duties for extra rations.
It meant actively taking part in the final solution from their training camp.
Nicki men were dispatched to ghettos and extermination camps like Saba Bo,
and bellette sort to help mass murder Jews by even though would be sent to one
of the most notorious of all Tring up after Auschwitz,
no other Nazi camp killed so many Jews as Tring up nearly 900,000 people,
including thousands of Roma died within its walls.
Only 67 inmates are known to have survived and Ivan would have the
distinction of making this hell. So,
so much worse later described as a tall powerfully built Ukrainian in his mid
twenties. The are Ivan of troubling was said to look remarkably like Ivan deman,
like deman. He had a simple, gentle air about him.
Survivors remembered his kind blue eyes,
almost as much as they remembered his sadism as Jewish victims were taken off
the trains and herded naked to the gas chambers.
Ivan would randomly pick out victims,
laughing and joking as he pulled them to one side he'd gouge eyes or drop off
ears or noses with a sword that he carried. Other times,
it beat people to death with a metal bar,
or maybe lash out at the running crowd with a sword.
Seeing if he couldn't slice open a passing belly.
This is just the stuff that we feel comfortable discussing,
although we're not sure comfort is the right word here.
This eyewitness testimony of I been doing far worse things.
Things will leave up to you to research by yourself.
If you want nightmares. Finally,
once dribbling victims had been loaded into the 25 square meter gas chamber,
Ivan with his mechanics,
knowledge of engines would turn on the motor that pumped carbon monoxide inside
at the height of the Holocaust.
He was capable of working so fast that some 3000 could be exterminate to do just
30 minutes. Perhaps it's little surprise that he soon earned his nickname.
One that would become asain on John Damian's fortunes in the decades to come
Ivan, Gros, Russian for Ivan, the terrible.
And just before we get into the rest of today's video,
a quick word from today's wonderful sponsor square space. If think about it,
this really does seem to be the age of creation.
Everyone is out there making a YouTube channel or a blog or a web store,
stuff like that. You've either got a great idea yourself, or, you know,
someone who has one.
And when it's time to move that project from your head onto the screen in front
of you, that Squarespace comes in.
Maybe you're the hands on type with lots of opinions and ideas about what
exactly your website should look like. If so,
very cool Squarespace has all of the customization options that you could ever
want. And there's no updates, no patches,
no technical nonsense to complicate life or make you just need something
functional, something that works with minimal thoughts. That's what I went for.
So you can just focus on the content and not the coat of paints. In that case,
pick one of their beautiful templates to make a website that is both fresh and
simple, and also for you. And once you're done setting up the website,
locking in the domain, maybe playing with some of the colors,
there are so many extra features that Squarespace provide that your website can
thrive. Email campaigns, patronage, portals, social integrations, ING areas,
analytics, commercial options, 24 7 customer support.
Everything you need is in one place.
So when you are ready to get started on the next project of yours, big or small,
if it evolves a website, it's gotta be with Squarespace right now,
you can go to squarespace.com for a free trial,
and we're ready to launch your new site to squarespace.com forward slash
biographics.
And you will save 10% off your first purchase of a website or a domain.
And now back to today's video
In total live and Gros is thought to have personally flipped the switch that led
to over 800,000 dying in Trius chambers,
even among the holocausts mass murderers, this would make him one of the worst.
And yet at the end of the war,
nor could say what had happened to him after an inmate uprising in 1943, Ivan,
the terrible vanish from TRIA,
not long after the camp was raised and all remaining records were destroyed.
It was this mystery,
this void at the heart of tri story that would later cause the innocent Toan so
much such or alternatively,
it was this disappearing act that would allowed AAN to escape justice for so
long,
1945 at last saw the two broken threads of his story twing back together
at the end of the war, everyone agrees,
saw the one time Ukrainian peasant living in a displaced person's camp in
Germany like millions of others.
Tom was waiting for the next chapter of his life to begin the one that would
hope fully taken far away from the European carnage.
It would wind up being a hell of a weight in the time it took for Damian's
paperwork to be processed and is visa issued for immigration to the United
States. See netan married Vera Bloche and they had a daughter.
It wasn't until 1952 that the family were given the all clear to move across the
Atlantic, but move they did settling in Cleveland to New York,
took a job as a mechanic for the Ford motor company.
He and ver had two more kids in 1958.
The former Ukrainian became a naturalized us citizen to celebrate his new
identity.
He legally changed his name from Ivan to John while it certainly helped him
integrate it.
Maybe also helped the process of forgetting of leaving behind all of the horrors
that it's seen in Europe.
As John de lived out his own little slice of the American dream and a dream
is perhaps all it really was. He worked hard and went to church on weekends.
He helped mend his neighbors cars or fixed up local kids bikes,
where the family got a garden. He started growing vegetables.
He was especially proud of his zucchinis,
perhaps there's this blisfully dull existence drifted on.
It began to seem like his wartime experiences were fading,
but maybe what happened in Europe had been the dream all along.
And this suburban life right here was the only reality that he had ever known.
Sadly, Forman note. That's not how others felt those who'd survived.
The Holocaust knew how very real that hell had been and they wouldn't rest until
justice was done to the perpetrators.
The first big wonderful was adult Hyman known as the architect at the Holocaust.
Aikman was captured by the Mustad and Argentina in 1960,
and then placed on trial in Israel. The following year,
his execution was a warning to the war criminals still in hiding that Dory
wasn't over that they were now being hunted. Yes,
it was a much less famous case that really showed what man York's future would
hold in 1964,
the New York times revealed that a friendly Queen's housewife was really her
mind. Brown Steiner,
the infamous stomping mayor of my concentration camp known for the sadistic
delight she took in kicking inmates to death.
It was the beginning of a wave of such discoveries as America was forced to
face. The fact that hundreds of Nazis had made it to the United States,
either clandestinely or with active CIA help.
But whilst this was an embarrassment for Washington,
it was party time in Moscow, in the zero sum game of the cold war.
Anything that was bad for the other side was worth encouraging.
And so it was that in 1975, Soviet agents handed a Ukrainian American newspaper,
a list of former Soviet citizens who'd collaborated with the Nazis among the
names was one that was destined to become infamous Ivan deman.
The case against Amman began slowly enough.
At first it was just an immigration naturalization service investigations.
Since Deen appeared to have lied on his paperwork about his Nazi connections,
evidence was soon found the placed to of the soba Bo extermination camp.
One of the tra Nick men who guarded the Jews as they were herded to their
deaths. At this point, the department of justice got involved in the case,
went crazy. When asked to identify collaborators from a set of photos,
Jewish survivor has picked out to man, but they didn't place him at soor. No.
They said that this man had been at tra blinker.
They'd recognize him anywhere since they kept seeing his face in their
nightmares. He was Iman the terrible.
And so it began the long complex legal battle that would consume the rest of
deman York's life. First,
there was the case to strip him of his citizenship initiated in 1977 and only
ending in 1981. When his us passport was finally revoked,
then there was the series of lawsuits aim at deporting him at sending him back
to Soviet Ukraine. But before he could be put on a plane, Israel intervened,
if Timan really was the notorious Ivan gro,
then they wanted to extra item to put him on trial just as they had Aman.
And yet more legal hearings were launched throughout his all under Y never
swerved from his story that had been a prisoner of war,
that he was an innocent simple man. Who'd been mistaken for another.
If he really was guilty, he told his son-in-law.
The easiest thing to do would be to take a bottle of sleeping pills while
everything over to the family, save the family shame and go to sleep forever.
But he chose to keep on fighting. He explained, proved his innocence.
The legal system disagreed in February, 1986.
The Israeli extradition request was granted to MEOC was put on a plane and told
he faced the death penalty of verdict reserved in Israel for war criminals and
genocide perpetrators. The trial opened Jerusalem on February the 16th, 1987,
like the Iman trial before it, the whole thing was televised.
The result was likely some of the most harrowing footage of a broadcast.
We won't go over the survivor testimony here, there accounting of the crimes,
Ivan crony committed in tri blinker,
but we will note the way the witnesses consistently agreed on one important
fact.
The man sat before them was indeed the sadus who tortured and murdered so many
icy. I of it in front of me,
one declared other evidence soon mounted up an ID card from Thero camp
was supplied with the Soviet archives.
One that showed MEAG had been trained to help in the final solution.
It wasn't him de declared the photo was a fake, but experts proved otherwise.
Then there was the two in 1942,
the SS started to touring members with their blood type deman could scars on his
left arm.
Exactly where that tattoo should have been as if it desperately tried to remove
it.
Still the defense under Israeli attorney Jo arm shaft L did its best Thero camp
ID was real. They contended, but it proved him.
Yao could been at the so Bo termination camp, not TripLink.
The plan was to effectively prove deman was a collaborator,
but not I the terrible with just a single charge against him,
physically pressing the switch that flooded the chambers with carbon monoxide
proving.
He was a different camp guard would at least spare him the death penalty.
In the end though, deman forced them to drop the tactic. He was an innocent man.
He kept repeating as if he wanted it on the record.
The trial ended on February the 18th, 1988.
The verdict was guilty on April the 25th.
John Damian was sentenced to death by hanging and what would've been only the
second civil execution, Israel ever carried out the hypothetical.
There would've been because Damian would never feel the news around his neck.
Never be cremated like ado.
Iman have his ashes scattered a sea instead.
Events in Europe were about to upend geopolitics.
And one small side effect would be to me leaving Israel, a free man
With John deman declared guilty.
An appeals process began one that seemed cursed for the defense in November,
1988. One of deman York's lawyers fell to his death from a 15 story window.
And what was later ruled to suicide? A few days later,
his lawyer Joran Shaftel had acid thrown in his face by a Holocaust survivor,
leaving him scarred and blinded in one eye. But for all this drama in Israel,
it would be in Eastern Europe.
The Damian's fate was decided in 1991 with the appeals says still underway.
The Soviet union gave one last terrific grown before collapsing into so many
broken communist streams in Kiev and Moscow archives once held in utmost secrecy
by the KGB were thrown open as historians raced east to make use of this
treasure trove to man's defense team joined them.
What they found there would forever end the TRICA survivors hope for justice.
Ivan. The terrible had not been Ivan, Iman, 80 Trony men who'd guarded.
Tri blinker had been taken back to Ukraine after the war questioned by the KGB,
and then mostly executed their statements living on in boxes of dusty old
files.
All of them reported that Ivan Graney had been a man with the second name.
Chenko an engineer who took great delight in running the gas motors that killed
thousands of Jews. What happened to him after he left a blinker was unknown.
Some said, had been shot in 1943.
Others said that had been sent to Italy in 1944. Only to banish.
There was even talk that had been cited in a brothel in new Yugoslavia.
Later that same year in short, the fate of I in the terrible was unknown.
He may have died in the war. He may have lived a long happy life,
never once punished for all the cruelty he inflicted.
The only thing certain was that he hadn't em,
immigrated to the us and settled in Cleveland under the name,
John Deen on July the 29th, 1993,
Israel Supreme court overturned Deens can eviction. He was not. I the terrible,
he hadn't tortured and murdered trip blinker. He was a free man,
at least for now because the collapse of the USSR also revealed records that
offered a different picture of de not as a monster,
but neither as an innocent man found in Moscow.
The confiscated internal documents of Troy Nicky cab finally offered a detailed
picture of what Damian had done after being captured in crimee like Ivan
Marchenko had volunteered to help the Germans.
Like Marchenko had been trained up as Aroy man.
And like Marchenko had been sent to players' trade in an extermination camp
rather than tripling. It had been soor and there was no evidence.
Damia could committed the vile stomach churning act.
Simon Gros had what there was evidence for though was the man cuz auxiliary
number 1, 3 93, helping her tens of thousands of Jews into the gas chambers.
There had been no access, torture, no sword, no cutting off noses.
No,
just the knowledge that he was leading untold innocence to certain death and
that it happened traded all their lives to improve his own chance of survival.
Although Israel could have tried him again for being at so bought the government
declined in 1993, Manuel returned to the USA,
but with something like the truth now out there,
there would be no welcome home party.
Although evidence of misconduct by the DOJs office of special investigations,
Sodo Y's citizenship,
the examination of his past in dent by 1999,
the DOJ had evidence of Emmanuel helping perpetrate the Holocaust,
not just at so Bo,
but also at Madan and floss Enberg in 2002,
his citizenship was again revoked three years later,
the deportation order came through at last in 2008 Germany declared it wanted to
do extra item that be one final trial for Aman.
And this time he would have to answer for the crimes. He really committed
In the immediate aftermath of world war II.
Germany didn't exactly fall over itself to try former Nazis. Oh sure.
The worst killers were mostly convicted, but the middle men,
those who'd willingly murdered in the concentration camps or help the Nazis
round up undesirables. Well,
a lot of them never saw the inside of a courtroom and were not just talking
functionaries who passively helped the right commit its crimes.
The histor Andreas IUL has estimated that 6,500 SS members who served at
Auschwitz made it out of the second world war alive. Some of the vanished,
some wented into hiding, but a lot settled back into German society.
And the following decades,
only a hundred of these men were ever brought to trial and Eyre 50 were
convicted. And this was just those at Auschwitz factor in the other camps,
thousands who'd facilitated mass murder, never paid the price.
It was only in the 21st century that Germany seemed to have a change of heart
that the hunts began for any surviving participants in the final solution.
And it all started with John Damian.
A first the feeling was he couldn't be convicted.
President dictated that gods who'd never personally murdered.
Anyone should be found innocent,
especially if they were just following orders that all changed on may the 12th,
2011.
The day Damian was convicted as an accessory to over 27,000 murders,
abso war the verdict overturned decades of German legal thinking.
The judge effectively ruled that simply by helping in the act of mass murder.
Damian was as culpable as the vanished dive and Gros knee.
He may have been scared.
He may have been desperate to escape the horrific conditions in the Soviet P O w
camps.
But the ruling said that he had a choice and in becoming aro man to
had chosen badly in the aftermath of the case of wave of special prosecutions
began starting in 2013 German arrest warrants were issued against dozens of
elderly peopled been connected with the camps.
People like the Auschwitz accountant ask a groaning convicted in 2016, age 94,
people like Bruno day a nonagenarian who'd been a camp guard age 17 and
found himself handed a two year sentence by a juvenile court in 2020.
Similar cases made possible by Damian's conviction are still ongoing.
As the script was being written 96 year old,
former start off camp typist Igar Faria made international headlines by going on
the run before her trial could begin. Her case is just one of 10,
still making their way through the German legal system.
Not that John deun would see any of this.
The former cyber war camp guard died in a German nursing home on March the 17th,
2012 age 91 because this appeals had not yet been exhausted.
He technically remains innocent under German law today it's widely accepted that
Doman was not having the terrible, but just a low level trait,
a man who volunteered to help kill Jews to save his own skin and was never able
to escape the consequences of that terrible decision. For some survivors,
his eventual conviction was a source of comfort,
acknowledgement that without these willing low level operatives,
the Holocaust could never have been as awful as it was for others though.
The saga of deman only dredged up horrific memories,
acting as little more than a reminder that the real alive and the terrible,
never faced justice for his crimes in a way,
this paradox is the heart of deman story. He was an awful man.
They were worse. Karma caught up with him, but others got away in the ends.
Maybe all we can say is that John deman story is one that shows the trauma of
Europe's 20th century of a boy who suffered then grew up to pass that suffering
on to others in the worst way possible.
He may not have been either the terrible, but deman was a guilty man.
Whether he got the punishment he deserved or whether justice was really done is
up to each of us to decide. So I hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you did, please do hit that like button below.
Don't forget to subscribe and as always, thank you for watching.